added GPU-accelerated image processing on the TUD HPC cluster (#50)
BiAPoL/blog: till_korten/devbio-napari_cluster/readme.md

# GPU-accelerated image processing on the TUD HPC cluster
[Till Korten](https://biapol.github.io/blog/till_korten), July 29th 2022

The TUD HPC cluster provides a lot of computing performance including GPU support.
This blog post explains how to run your own jupyter notebooks using [napari](https://napari.org) and/or [clEsperanto](https://clesperanto.net) on the cluster.

> ### This blog post is for you if:

Author: removed them

* data processing takes a significant amount of time on your computer
* the time intensive part of your data processing works without user interaction
* you want to use your computer for other important tasks (such as life after five) while your data are being processed
* you have a working python script or jupyter notebook that processes your data
* the computers available to you limit you because:
  * lacking GPU (or too little GPU RAM)
  * not enough RAM
  * not enough disk space
  * not enough CPUs

### You may need to look elsewhere if:

> * you are still actively developing on your workflow and are installing/removing python packages on a regular basis. We are working with singularity images and it is not feasible to frequently build new images for you with new python packages. You may want to look at Roberts article on [using google colab](../../robert_haase/clesperanto_google_colab/).

Author: I could simply write: "For technical reasons, it is quite some effort for us to install new python packages for you on the cluster."

However, in my opinion, if we are imposing limitations, it is good to give the actual reason. That way, either the user does not understand the reason but understands that it is technically complicated, or the user understands the reason. Either way, the user is more likely to accept the limitation.

Once you are happy with your configuration, click the orange button `Spawn` at the very bottom.

<img src="images/3_configure_node.png" width="500" />

You will now see a wait bar. Do not worry if it does not move, this bar is always at 50%. It usually takes 2-5 min to get a node.

<img src="images/4_wait.png" width="500" />

## Step 3: Open a terminal

Open a terminal by clicking on file (1 in the image below) -> new (2) -> Terminal (3)

<img src="images/5_open_terminal.png" width="500" />

## Step 4: Install a custom jupyter kernel for your user

In the terminal, execute the following code:

```bash
git clone https://gitlab.mn.tu-dresden.de/bia-pol/singularity-devbio-napari.git
```
You will be asked for a user name and password. Enter the following:

User name: `git_pull`

> Password: `Bc6Yg8k5MyZzURNuWChR`

Author: This is a token that has only pull access to the repository. Without it, people could not get the files they need to install the singularity containers and jupyter kernels.

From a security point of view, it is like making just the git the repository public. Without giving users the ability to all the other gitlab functionality (like reading/posting issues etc).

In the mid-term it would make more sense, to actually make the project public. Then we can simply revoke the token and remove it here.

Once the download has finished, enter the following:

```bash
cd singularity-devbio-napari
./install.sh <version>
```

> replace `<version>` with the version of our devbio-napari environment you want to use. At the time of writing, the latest version was `v0.1.5`. Always specify a version (or a tag name you got from us in case we created a custom environment for you). This will ensure that your code is always executed in the same environment and your data analysis is reproducible. Note down the version you use in your lab book!

Author: Since the repository is private, we cannot post a link (more precisely, users would not be able to open it).

This is another argument for making the repository public.

We cannot go our usual route and publish it on github, because the CI workflow is gitlab-specific. Gitlab.com might work, but I don't know what their space restrictions are for the container registry.
The easiest would be to make the project public as-is, but last time I tried that setting was greyed out.

Wait 2-5 min until the image is downloaded and verified. The output should look something like this:

<img src="images/6_terminal_output.png" width="500" />

If everything went well, close the terminal by clicking on the small X at the top of the terminal window.

## Step 5: Open a Jupyter Notebook with the newly installed environment

Reload the browser tab. You should then see a two new icons with the name `devbio-napari_v0.1.5` one in the Notebooks section and one in the Console section. Click on the former (red rectangle in the image below).

<img src="images/7_open_notebook.png" width="250" />

## Step 6: Verify that the environment works

Run some test code to verify that the environment has everything you need. For example:

> <img src="images/8_tests.png" width="500" />

Author: done

<!-- we should also add instructions on how to get data onto the cluster from the fileserver. -> use material from issue #22 after testing this -->

## Hints

### Troubleshooting

> Contact us if you run into problems. **Which contact details should we give here?**

Author: removed troubleshooting

> If some python modules are missing, we can create a custom environment for you. However, please understand that we cannot do this every few days, so make sure you tell us **all the additional modules you need at once**. Ideally, you create a minimal working environment on your machine **test it thoroughly** and then export it as an `environment.yml` file like so:

Author: removed

__CUDA Information__
CUDA Device Initialized                       : True
CUDA Driver Version                           : 11040
CUDA Detect Output:
Found 4 CUDA devices
id 0    b'NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB'                              [SUPPORTED]
                      compute capability: 8.0
                           pci device id: 0
                              pci bus id: 139
id 1    b'NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB'                              [SUPPORTED]
                      compute capability: 8.0
                           pci device id: 0
                              pci bus id: 144
id 2    b'NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB'                              [SUPPORTED]
                      compute capability: 8.0
                           pci device id: 0
                              pci bus id: 187
id 3    b'NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB'                              [SUPPORTED]
                      compute capability: 8.0
                           pci device id: 0
                              pci bus id: 193
Summary:
	4/4 devices are supported
```
Note the 1TB (sic!) of total RAM available on the nodes in the alpha partition of the TUD cluster

> 

Author: Clinfo is not installed on the cluster. We could try to install it in the singularity image. but I did not bother so far, since opencl itself works.

# GPU-accelerated image processing on the TUD HPC cluster
[Till Korten](https://biapol.github.io/blog/till_korten), July 29th 2022

> The [High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster at the compute center (ZIH) of the TU Dresden](https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/hpc?set_language=en) provides a lot of computational resources including GPU support, we can use for analyzing data in the life-sciences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster at the compute center (ZIH) of the TU Dresden](https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/hpc?set_language=en) provides a lot of computational resources including GPU support, which we can use for analyzing data in the life-sciences.
```

This blog post explains how to run your own [jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) using some [napari](https://napari.org) plugins and GPU-accelerated image processing python libraries such as [clEsperanto](https://clesperanto.net) on the cluster.

### This blog post is for you if
* data processing takes a significant amount of time on your computer

> * the time intensive part of your data processing works without user interaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the time-intensive part of your data processing works without user interaction
```

* you want to use your computer for other important tasks (such as life after five) while your data are being processed
* you have a working python script or jupyter notebook that processes your data
* the computers available to you limit you because:
  * no GPU (or too little GPU RAM)
  * not enough RAM
  * not enough disk space
  * not enough CPUs

### You may need to look elsewhere if

> * you are still actively developing on your workflow and are installing/removing python packages on a regular basis. We are working with [singularity containers](https://sylabs.io/singularity/) and it is not feasible to frequently build new containers for you with new python packages. You may want to look at Roberts article on [using google colab](../../robert_haase/clesperanto_google_colab/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* you are still actively developing on your workflow and are installing/removing python packages on a regular basis. We are working with [singularity containers](https://sylabs.io/singularity/) and it is not feasible to frequently build new containers for you with new python packages. You may want to look at Roberts article on [using google colab](../../robert_haase/clesperanto_google_colab/) if you need more ressources for your workflow but are still in the process of active development rather than deplayoment.
```

> * your workflow needs a graphical user interface other than standard jupyter notebook stuff

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* your workflow needs a graphical user interface other than what jupyter notebooks can provide
```

Once you are happy with your configuration, click the orange button `Spawn` at the very bottom.

<img src="images/3_configure_node.png" width="500" />

You will now see a wait bar. Do not worry if it does not move, this bar is always at 50%. It usually takes 2-5 min to get a node.

<img src="images/4_wait.png" width="500" />

## Step 3: Open a terminal

Open a terminal by clicking on file (1 in the image below) -> new (2) -> Terminal (3)

<img src="images/5_open_terminal.png" width="500" />

## Step 4: Install a custom jupyter kernel for your user

In the terminal, execute the following code:

```bash
git clone https://gitlab.mn.tu-dresden.de/bia-pol/singularity-devbio-napari.git
```
You will be asked for a user name and password. Enter the following:

User name: `git_pull`

Password: `Bc6Yg8k5MyZzURNuWChR`

Once the download has finished, enter the following:

```bash
cd singularity-devbio-napari
./install.sh <version>
```

> replace `<version>` with the version of our devbio-napari environment you want to use. At the time of writing, the latest version was `v0.1.5`. Always specify a version (or a tag name you got from us in case we created a custom environment for you). This will ensure that your code is always executed in the same environment and your data analysis is reproducible. Note down the version you use in your lab book!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
replace `<version>` with the version of our devbio-napari environment you want to use. At the time of writing, the latest version was `v0.1.5`. Always specify a version (or a tag name you got from us in case we created a custom environment for you). This will ensure that your code is always executed in the same environment and your data analysis is reproducible. 

*Note*: In order to ensure [repeatability ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Repeatability) and [reproducibility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducibility) of the results ou obtained from using a singularity container, we strongly recommend and encourage you to keep track of the used versions. This way, you can ensure the integrity of your analysis workflow further down the line.
```
